\section{Evaluation}%
\label{sec:eval}

\input{lst/samples}

\begin{figure}
  \centering %
  \subfloat[Testbeds $10\pm$ assertion \emph{Uncorrected typos!} during semantic analysis.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\OclgrindUncorrectedTypos}}}%
  \label{lst:oclgrind-uncorrected-typos}
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Testbeds $1\pm$, $2\pm$ segmentation fault due to implicit address space conversion.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\NvidiaRecursionSegfault}}}%
  \label{lst:nvidia-recursion-segfault}
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Testbeds $3\pm$ assertion \emph{sel.hasDoubleType()} during code generation.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\IntelGtDoubleAssertion}}}%
  \label{lst:intel-gt2-double-assertion}
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Testbeds $3\pm$ assertion \emph{scalarizeInsert} during code generation.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\BeignetScalarizeInsert}}}%
  \label{lst:beignet-scalarize-insert}
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Of the 10 compilers we tested, 6 crash with segfault when compiling this kernel.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\AlmostEverythingCrash}}}%
  \label{lst:almost-everything-crash}
  }\\%
  \caption{Example kernels which crash compilers.}%
  \vspace{-1.1em}
\end{figure}

\noindent
We report on the results of DeepSmith testing of the 10 OpenCL systems from
Table~\ref{tab:platforms}, in which each ran for 48 hours. We found bugs in all
the compilers we tested --- every compiler crashed, and every compiler generated
programs which either crash or silently compute the wrong result. To date, we
have submitted 67 bug reports to compiler vendors. We first provide a
qualitative analysis of compile-time and runtime defects found, followed by a
quantitative comparison of our approach against the state-of-the-art in OpenCL
compiler fuzzing --- CLSmith~\cite{Lidbury2015a}. DeepSmith is able to identify
a broad range of defects, many of which CLSmith cannot, for only a fraction of
the engineering effort. Finally, we provide a quantitative analysis of compiler
robustness over time, using the compiler crash rate of every LLVM release in the
past two years as a metric of compiler robustness. We find that progress is
good, compilers are becoming more robust, yet the introduction of new features
and regressions ensures that compiler validation remains a moving target.

Unless stated otherwise, DeepSmith code listings are presented verbatim, with
only minor formatting changes applied to save space. No test case reduction,
either manual or automatic, was needed.

For the remainder of the paper we identify testbeds using the OpenCL system
number from Table~\ref{tab:platforms}, suffixed with $+$, $-$, or $\pm$ to
denote optimizations on, off, or either, respectively.

\subsection{Compile-time Defects}%
\label{subsec:compile-time-defects}

OpenCL is typically compiled online, which amplifies the significance of
detecting compile-time defects, as they may not be discovered until code has
been shipped to customers. We found numerous cases where DeepSmith kernels
trigger a crash in the compiler (and as a result, the host process), or cause
the compiler to loop indefinitely. In the testing time allotted we have
identified 199 test cases which trigger unreachable code failures, triggered 31
different compiler assertions, and produced 114 distinct stack traces from other
compiler crashes.

\begin{figure}
  \centering %
  \subfloat[Reduced from 48 line kernel.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\ParserFailOne}}}%
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Reduced from 52 line kernel.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\ParserFailTwo}}}%
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Reduced from 68 line kernel.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\ParserFailThree}}}%
  }\\%
  \caption{Example codes which crash parsers.}%
  \vspace{-1.1em}
  \label{lst:parser-crashes}
  %
\end{figure}

\paragraph{Semantic Analysis Failures}

Compilers should produce meaningful diagnostics when inputs are invalid, yet we
discovered dozens of compiler defects attributable to improper or missing error
handling. Many generation and mutation based approaches to compiler validation
have focused solely on testing under \emph{valid inputs}. As such, this class of
bugs may go undiscovered. We believe that our approach contributes a significant
improvement to generating plausibly-erroneous code over prior random-enumeration
approaches.

The use of undeclared identifiers is a core error diagnostic which one would
expect to be robust in a mature compiler. DeepSmith discovered cases in which
the presence of undeclared identifiers causes the Testbeds $10\pm$ compiler to
crash. For example, the undeclared identifier \texttt{c} in
Figure~\ref{lst:oclgrind-uncorrected-typos} raises an assertion during semantic
analysis of the AST when used as an array index.

Type errors were an occasional cause of compile-time defect.
Figure~\ref{lst:nvidia-recursion-segfault} induces a crash in NVIDIA compilers
due to an implicit conversion between global to constant address qualifiers.
Worse, we found that Testbeds $3\pm$ would loop indefinitely on some kernels
containing implicit conversions from a pointer to an integer, as shown in
Figure~\ref{lst:beignet-ptr-int-spin}. While spinning, the compiler would
utilize 100\% of the CPU and consume an increasing amount of host memory until
the entire system memory is depleted and the process crashes.

Occasionally, incorrect program semantics will remain undetected until late in
the compilation process. Both Figures~\ref{lst:intel-gt2-double-assertion}
and~\ref{lst:beignet-scalarize-insert} pass the type checker and semantic
analysis, but trigger compiler assertions during code generation.

An interesting yet unintended byproduct of having trained DeepSmith on thousands
of real world examples is that the model learned to occasionally generate
compiler-specific code, such as invoking compiler builtins. We found the quality
of error handling on these builtins to vary wildly. For example,
Figure~\ref{lst:almost-everything-crash} silently crashes 6 of the 10 compilers,
which, to the best of our knowledge, makes DeepSmith the first random program
generator to induce a defect through exploiting compiler-specific functionality.

\paragraph{Parser Failures}

Parser development is a mature and well understood practice. We uncovered parser
errors in several compilers. Each of the code samples in
Figure~\ref{lst:parser-crashes} induce crash errors during parsing of compound
statements in both Testbeds $5\pm$ and $7\pm$. For space, we have hand-reduced
the listings to minimal code samples, which we have reported to Intel. Each
reduction took around 6 edit-compile steps, taking less than 10 minutes. In
total, we have generated 100 distinct programs which crash compilers during
parsing.

\begin{figure}
  \centering %
  \subfloat[Testbeds $3\pm$ loop indefinitely, leaking memory until the entire system memory is depleted and the process crashes.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\BeignetPtrIntSpin}}}%
  \label{lst:beignet-ptr-int-spin}
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Testbed $1+$ hangs during optimization of kernels with large loop bounds. Testbeds $1-$ and $2\pm$ compile in under 1 second.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\NvidiaOptLoopHang}}}%
  \label{lst:nvidia-opt-loop-hang}
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Testbeds $4+$, $5+$, $6+$, $7+$ hang during optimization of kernels with non-terminating loops.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\IntelOptLoopHang}}}%
  \label{lst:intel-inf-loop}
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Testbeds $7\pm$ loops indefinitely, consuming 100\% CPU usage.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\XeonPhiSpin}}}%
  \label{lst:xeon-phi-spin}
  }\\%
  \caption{Example kernels which hang compilers.}%
  \vspace{-1.3em}
  \label{lst:compiler-hangs}
  %
\end{figure}

\paragraph{Compiler Hangs}

As expected, some compile-time defects are optimization sensitive. Testbed $1+$
hangs on large loop bounds, shown in Figure~\ref{lst:nvidia-opt-loop-hang}. All
commercial Intel compilers we tested hang during optimization of non-terminating
loops (Figure~\ref{lst:intel-inf-loop}).

Testbeds $7\pm$ loop indefinitely during compilation of the simple kernel in
Figure~\ref{lst:xeon-phi-spin}.

\paragraph{Other errors}

Some compilers are more permissive than others. Testbeds~$4\pm$, $6\pm$, $9\pm$
reject out-of-range literal values e.g. \texttt{int i =
0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF}, whilst Testbeds $3\pm$, $5\pm$, $7\pm$, $8\pm$, and
$10\pm$ interpret the literal as an \texttt{unsigned long long} and implicitly
cast to an integer value of \texttt{-1}. Testbeds $1\pm$, $2\pm$ emit no
warning.

Testbeds~$1\pm$, $2\pm$, $3\pm$ rejected address space qualifiers on automatic
variables, where all other testbeds successfully compiled and executed.

On Testbeds~$3\pm$, the statement \texttt{int n = mad24(a, (32),
get\_global\_size(0));} (a call to a math builtin with mixed types) is rejected
as ambiguous.

\subsection{Runtime Defects}%
\label{subsec:runtime-defects}

\begin{figure}
  \centering %
  \subfloat[Testbeds $4+$, $6+$ incorrectly optimize the \texttt{if} statement, causing the conditional branch to execute (it shouldn't). This pattern of integer comparison to thread ID is widely used.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\IntelSizetIntUnreduced}}}%
  \label{lst:intel-size_t-int-unreduced}
  }\\%
  \subfloat[A race condition in \texttt{switch} statement evaluation causes $10\pm$ to sporadically crash when executed with a number of threads $> 1$.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\OclgrindRaceSwitch}}}%
  \label{lst:oclgrind-race-switch}
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Testbeds $3\pm$ silently miscompile ternary assignments in which the operands are different global buffers.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\BeignetTernary}}}%
  \label{lst:beig-ternary-ops}
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Compilation should fail due to call to undefined function \texttt{B()}; Testbeds $8\pm$ silently succeed then crash upon kernel execution.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\PoclUndefinedSymbols}}}%
  \label{lst:pocl-undefined-symbols}
  }\\%
  \caption{Example kernels which are miscompiled.}%
  \vspace{-1.3em}
\end{figure}

Prior work on compiler test case generation has focused on extensive stress-
testing of compiler middle-ends to uncover miscompilations~\cite{Chen2014a}.
CSmith, and by extension, CLSmith, specifically targets this class of bugs.
Grammar based enumeration is highly effective at this task, yet is bounded by
the expressiveness of the grammar. Here we provide examples of bugs which cannot
currently be discovered by CLSmith.

\paragraph{Thread-dependent Flow Control}

A common pattern in OpenCL is to obtain the thread identity, often as an
\texttt{int}, and to compare this against some fixed value to determine whether
or not to complete a unit of work (46\% of OpenCL kernels on GitHub use this
($tid \rightarrow$ int, \texttt{if (tid < \ldots) \{\ldots\}}) pattern).
DeepSmith, having modeled the frequency with which this pattern occurs in real
handwritten code, generates many permutations of this pattern. And in doing so,
exposed a bug in the optimizer of Testbeds $4+$ and $6+$ which causes the
\texttt{if} branch in Figure~\ref{lst:intel-size_t-int-unreduced} to be
erroneously executed when the kernel is compiled with optimizations enabled. We
have reported this issue to Intel. CLSmith does not permit the thread identity
to modify control flow, rendering such productions impossible.

Figure~\ref{lst:oclgrind-race-switch} shows a simple program in which thread
identity determines the program output. We found that this test case would
sporadically crash Testbeds~$10\pm$, an OpenCL device simulator and debugger.
Upon reporting to the developers, the underlying cause was quickly diagnosed as
a race condition in \texttt{switch} statement evaluation, and fixed within a
week.

\paragraph{Kernel Inputs}

CLSmith kernels accept a single buffer parameter into which each thread computes
its result. This fixed prototype limits the ability to detect bugs which depend
on input arguments. Figure~\ref{lst:beig-ternary-ops} exposes a bug of this
type. Testbeds $3\pm$ will silently miscompile ternary operators when the
ternary operands consist of values stored in multiple different global buffers.
CLSmith, with its fixed single input prototype, is unable to discover this bug.

\paragraph{Latent Compile-time Defects}

Sometimes, invalid compiler inputs may go undetected, leading to runtime defects
only upon program execution. Since CLSmith enumerates only well-formed programs,
this class of bugs cannot be discovered.

Figure~\ref{lst:pocl-undefined-symbols} exposes a bug in which a kernel
containing an undefined symbol will successfully compile without warning on
Testbeds~$8\pm$, then crash the program when attempting to run the kernel. This
issue has been reported to the developers and fixed.

\subsection{Comparison to State-of-the-art}%
\label{subsec:vs_clsmith}

In this section, we provide a quantitative comparison of the bug-finding
capabilities of DeepSmith and CLSmith.

\paragraph{Results Overview}

\begin{table*}
  \scriptsize %
  \centering %
  \caption{%
  Results from 48 hours of testing using CLSmith and DeepSmith. System \#. as
  per Table~\ref{tab:platforms}. $\pm$ denotes optimizations off ($-$) vs on
  ($+$). The remaining columns denote the number of build crash (\bc), build
  timeout (\bto), anomalous build failure (\abf), anomalous runtime crash
  (\arc), anomalous wrong-output (\awo), and pass (\textbf{\cmark}) results.
  \vspace{-1.1em}
  }
  \input{tab/megatable}
  \vspace{-1.1em}
  \label{tab:megatable}
\end{table*}

\begin{figure}
  \centering %
  \includegraphics[width=\columnwidth]{img/vs-clsmith}%
  \vspace{-1em}
  \caption{%
  Comparison of runtimes (a) and test case sizes (b). DeepSmith test cases
  are on average evaluated $3.03\times$ faster than CLSmith ($2.45\times$,
  and $4.46\times$ for generation and execution, respectively), and are two
  orders of magnitude smaller. Timings do not include the cost of timeouts
  which would increase the performance gains of DeepSmith by nearly a factor
  of two.
  }%
  \vspace{-1.3em}
  \label{fig:vs-clsmith}
  %
\end{figure}

Table~\ref{tab:megatable} shows the results of 48 hours of consecutive testing
for all Testbeds. An average of 15k CLSmith and 91k DeepSmith test cases were
evaluated on each Testbed, taking 12.1s and 1.90s per test case respectively.
There are three significant factors providing the sixfold increase in testing
throughput achieved by DeepSmith over CLSmith: test cases are faster to
generate, test cases are less likely to timeout (execute for 60 seconds without
termination), and the test cases which do not timeout execute faster.

Figure~\ref{fig:vs-clsmith}a shows the generation and execution times of
DeepSmith and CLSmith test cases, excluding timeouts\footnote{If timeouts are
included then the performance improvement of DeepSmith is $6.5\times$ with the
execution times being $11\times$ faster. However, this number grows as we change
the arbitrary timeout threshold, so for fairness we have chosen to exclude it.}.
DeepSmith generation time grows linearly with program length, and is on average
$2.45\times$ faster than CLSmith. Test case execution is on average $4.46\times$
faster than CLSmith.

The optimization level generally does not affect testing throughput
significantly, with the exception of Testbed $7+$. Optimization of large structs
is expensive on Testbed $7+$, and CLSmith test cases use global structs
extensively. This is a known issue --- in~\cite{Lidbury2015a} the authors omit
large-scale testing on this device for this reason. The use of structs in
handwritten OpenCL is comparatively rare --- only 7.1\% of kernels on GitHub use
them.


\paragraph{Comparison of Test Cases} %

The average CLSmith program is 1189 lines long (excluding headers). CLSmith test
cases require reduction in order to expose the underlying bug. An automated
approach to OpenCL test case reduction is presented in~\cite{Pflanzer2016},
though it requires on average 100 minutes for each test case using a
parallelized implementation (and over 6 hours if this parallelization is not
available); the authors also suggest a final manual pass after automated
reduction. In contrast, DeepSmith learned to program from humans, and humans do
not typically write such large kernel functions. The average DeepSmith kernel is
20 lines long, which is interpretable without reduction, either manual or
automatic.


\paragraph{Comparison of Results} %

Both testing systems found anomalous results of all types. In 48 hours of
testing, CLSmith discovered compile-time crashes (\bc) in 8 of the 20 testbeds,
DeepSmith crashed all of them. DeepSmith triggered 31 distinct compiler
assertions, CLSmith 2. Both of the assertions triggered by CLSmith were also
triggered by DeepSmith. DeepSmith also triggered 3 distinct \emph{unreachable!}
compile-time crashes, CLSmith triggered 0. The ratio of build failures is higher
in the token-level generation of DeepSmith (51\%) than the grammar-based
generation of CLSmith (26\%).

The Intel CPU Testbeds ($4\pm$, $5\pm$, $6\pm$, and $7\pm$) would occasionally
emit a stack trace upon crashing, identifying the failure point in a specific
compiler pass. CLSmith triggered such crashes in 4 distinct passes. DeepSmith
triggered crashes in 10 distinct passes, including 3 of the 4 in which CLSmith
did. Figure~\ref{lst:intel-passes} provides examples. Many of these crashes are
optimization sensitive, and are more likely to occur when optimizations are
enabled. CLSmith was able to induce a crash in only one of the Intel testbeds
with optimizations disabled. DeepSmith crashed all of the compilers with both
optimizations enabled and disabled.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  % Result id: 110876
  \subfloat[\emph{Post-Dominance Frontier Construction} pass.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\IntelPostDominanceFrontier}}}%
  }\\%
  \subfloat[\emph{Simplify the CFG} pass.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\SimplifyTheCFGPass}}}%
  }\\%
  % Program id: 31656
  \subfloat[\emph{Predicator} pass.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\IntelPredicator}}}%
  }\\%
  \subfloat[\emph{Combine redundant instructions} pass.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\IntelCombineRedundant}}}%
  }\\%
  % Program id: 10596
  \subfloat[\emph{PrepareKernelArgs} pass.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\IntelPrepareKernelArgs}}}%
  }\\%
  % Program id: 37443
  \subfloat[\emph{Add SPIR related module scope metadata} pass.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\IntelSPIRMetadata}}}%
  }\\%
  % Program id: 44105
  \subfloat[\emph{Intel OpenCL RemoveDuplicationBarrier} pass.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\IntelRemoveDupeBarrier}}}%
  }\\%
  \subfloat[\emph{X86 DAG->DAG Instruction Selection} pass.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\DagPass}}}%
  }\\%
  \caption{Example kernels which crash Intel compiler passes.}%
  \label{lst:intel-passes}
\end{figure}

CLSmith produced many \bto results across 13 Testbeds. Given the large kernel
size, it is unclear how many of those are infinite loops or simply a result of
slow compilation of large kernels. The average size of CLSmith \bto kernels is
1558 lines. Automated test case reduction --- in which thousands of permutations
of a program are executed --- may be prohibitively expensive for test cases with
very long runtimes. DeepSmith produced \bto results across 11 Testbeds and with
an average kernel size of 9 lines, allowing for rapid identification of the
underlying problem.


\begin{figure}
  \centering %
  \subfloat[Assertion \emph{storing/loading pointers only support private array}.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\BeigPtrAssertion}}}%
  \label{lst:beig-ptr-assertion}
  }\\%
  \subfloat[Assertion \emph{iter != pointerOrigMap.end()}.]{%
  \noindent\mbox{\parbox{\columnwidth}{\usebox{\BeigIterAssertion}}}%
  \label{lst:beig-iter-assertion}
  }\\%
  \caption{Example kernels which trigger compiler assertions which both CLSmith and DeepSmith exposed.}%
  \vspace{-1.5em}
  \label{lst:beig-assertions}
\end{figure}

The integrated GPU Testbeds ($3\pm$) frequently failed to compile CLSmith
kernels, resulting in over 10k \bc and \bto results. Of the build crashes, 68\%
failed silently, and the remainder were caused by the same two compiler
assertions for which DeepSmith generated 4 line test cases, shown in
Figure~\ref{lst:beig-assertions}. DeepSmith also triggered silent build crashes
in Testbeds $3\pm$, and a further 8 distinct compiler assertions.

The 4719 \abf results for CLSmith on Testbeds $4\pm$ and $6\pm$ are all a result
of compilers rejecting empty declarations, (e.g. \texttt{int;}) which CLSmith
occasionally emits. DeepSmith also generated these statements, but with a much
lower probability, given that it is an unusual construct (0.6\% of test cases,
versus 7.0\% of CLSmith test cases).

ComputeAorta (Testbeds $9\pm$) defers kernel compilation so that it can perform
optimizations dependent on runtime parameters. This may contribute to the
relatively large number of \arc results and few \bc results of Testbeds $9\pm$.
Only DeepSmith was able to expose compile-time defects in this compiler.

Over the course of testing, a combined $3.4 \times 10^8$ lines of CLSmith code
was evaluated, compared to $3.8 \times 10^6$ lines of DeepSmith code. This
provides CLSmith a greater potential to trigger miscompilations. CLSmith
generated 33 programs with anomalous wrong-outputs. DeepSmith generated 30.


\subsection{Compiler Stability Over Time}%
\label{subsec:clangs}

The Clang front-end to LLVM supports OpenCL, and is commonly used in OpenCL
drivers. This in turn causes Clang-related defects to potentially affect
multiple compilers, for example the one in
Figure~\ref{lst:almost-everything-crash}. To evaluate the impact of Clang, we
used debug+assert builds of every LLVM release in the past 24 months and
processed 75,000 DeepSmith kernels through the Clang front-end (this includes
the lexer, parser, and type checker, but not code generation).

Figure~\ref{fig:clangs} shows that the crash rate of the Clang front-end is, for
the most part, steadily decreasing over time. The number of failing compiler
crashes decreased tenfold between 3.6.2 and 5.0.0. Table~\ref{tab:clangs} shows
the 7 distinct assertions triggered during this experiment. Assertion 1
(\emph{Uncorrected typos!}) is raised on all compiler versions --- see
Figure~\ref{lst:oclgrind-uncorrected-typos} for an example. The overall rate at
which the assertion is triggered has decreased markedly, although there are
slight increases between some releases. Notably, the current development trunk
has the second lowest crash rate, but is joint first in terms of the number of
unique assertions. Assertions 3 (\emph{Addr == 0 ||
hasTargetSpecificAddressSpace()}) and 4 (\emph{isScalarType()}) were triggered
by some kernels in the development trunk but not under any prior release. We
have submitted bug reports for each of the three assertions triggered in the
development trunk, as well as for two distinct unreachables.

The results emphasize that compiler validation is a moving target. Every change
and feature addition has the potential to introduce regressions or new failure
cases. Since LLVM will not release unless their compiler passes their own
extensive test suites, this also reinforces the case for compiler fuzzing. We
believe our approach provides an effective means for the generation of such
fuzzers, at a fraction of the cost of existing techniques.


\subsection{Extensibility of Language Model}

A large portion of the DeepSmith architecture is language-agnostic, requiring
only a corpus, encoder, and harness for each new language. This potentially
significantly lowers the barrier-to-entry compared with prior grammar-based
fuzzers. To explore this, we report on initial results in extending DeepSmith to
the Solidity programming language. Solidity is the smart contract programming
language of the Ethereum blockchain. At less than four years old, it lacks much
of the tooling of more established programming languages. Yet, it is an
important candidate for rigorous testing, as exploitable bugs may undermine the
integrity of the blockchain and lead to fraudulent transactions.

\paragraph{Testing Methodology}

We applied the same methodology to train the program generator as for OpenCL. We
assembled a corpus of Solidity contracts from GitHub, recursively inlining
imported modules where possible. We used the same tokenizer as for OpenCL, only
changing the list of language keywords and builtins. Code style was enforced
using clang-format. We trained the model in the same manner as OpenCL. No
modification to either the language model or generator code was required. We
created a simple compile-only test harness to drive the generated Solidity
contracts.

\paragraph{Initial Results}

We ran the generator and harness loop for 12 hours on four testbeds: the
Solidity reference compiler \texttt{solc} with optimizations on or off, and
\texttt{solc-js}, which is an Emscripten compiled version of the \texttt{solc}
compiler. Our results are summarized in Table~\ref{tab:solidity}. We found
numerous cases where the compiler silently crashes, and two distinct compiler
assertions. The first is caused by missing error handling of language features
(this issue is known to the developers). The source of the second assertion is
the JavaScript runtime and is triggered only in the Emscripten version,
suggesting an error in the automatic translation from LLVM to JavaScript.

Extending DeepSmith to a second programming required an additional 150 lines of
code (18 lines for the generator and encoder, the remainder for the test
harness) and took about a day. Given the re-usability of the core DeepSmith
components, there is a diminishing cost with the addition of each new language.
For example, the OpenCL encoder and re-writer, implemented using LLVM, could be
adapted to C with minimal changes. Given the low cost of extensibility, we
believe these preliminary results indicate the utility of our approach for
simplifying test case generation.
